# Macedonian

## Introduction

This sky culture has been created based on the _Sky map of Macedonian people_
reconstructed from the descriptions of constellations known to elderly
inhabitants of Macedonian villages.

## Description

Ethnoastronomical research among Macedonian people began in 1982, organized by
the Planetarium at Youth Cultural Centre. In the past years, around 140
villages in Republic of Macedonia have been visited and over 1500 inhabitants
have been interviewed and surveyed. All collected information from the
population have been published in the book “Sky over Macedonia” (Cenev G,
2004). An integral part of this book is the Sky map of Macedonian people which
has been reconstructed based on the descriptions of constellations known to
elderly inhabitants of Macedonian villages (Cenev G., 2000).

## Constellations

##### Mother Hen

Mother Hen (_Kvachka_) is the best-known constellation, which is recognized by
all elderly people in Macedonian villages, without any exception. This name
people use for the star cluster Pleiades.

##### Hawk

The Hawk (_Јastreb_), as one of the most famous enemies of the Mother Hen and
the Rooster, is right above them in an attacking position. Bright star Capella
(_Kapela_) from the constellation Auriga is actually known among people as
Hawk.

##### Fox

Fox (_Lisica_) is the second by importance natural enemy of the Mother Hen and
the Rooster so it is obvious why people also “see” it on the sky. The red color
of the bright star Aldebaran from the constellation of the Bull is the reason
why people perceive it as a Fox ready to attack the Mother Hen and the Rooster.

##### Pigs

Near to the Mother Hen, people on the sky noticed the star cluster Hyades.
Scattered appearance of the stars of this cluster associated people to the
image of pigs in a village yard, and so it’s called Pigs (_Svinji_).

##### Yoke

Yoke (_Jarem_). People under this name recognize group of stars in the
constellation Perseus. Yokes for the oxen usually is found in village yards so
that is why, like the previous constellation, it is an evidence of the general
image of people and purpose given to this part of the sky.

##### Ploughman

The Ploughman (_Orach_) is one of the three main characters in the sky. It is
the name people gave to the bright star Betelgeuse in the constellation of
Orion. Besides Betelgeuse, in building the image of this folk constellation,
some weaker and less bright stars from the surrounding are also taken into
account, because people say that the Ploughman is an image of a person with a
goad as he returns home.

##### Plough

The constellation Orion with its numerous bright stars and distinctive pattern
dominates the winter sky and can be easily found. People from Macedonian
villages usually point at the region around Orion’s belt saying that three
bright stars and surrounding less bright stars create an image of a wooden
Plough with two yoked oxen (_Ralo so Volovi_).

##### Wolves

Near to the plough with oxen, which is left on a field, people see two wolves
(_Volci_) as well. They are the bright stars Sirius in the constellation Canis
Major and Procyon in Canis Minor.

##### Cross

Complement with the people’s belief, when the Priest-thief saw God’s might he
started running in panic and lost his cross on the way. So next to the Priest’s
Straw there is the Cross (_Krst_).

##### Ears

Ears (_Ushi_). By this common word used as a jargon, Macedonian villagers mark
the part of the wooden plough that goes into the soil, used for plowing.

##### Trivet

The trivet (_Pirustija_) is a metal device with three legs (tripod) which fits
over the fireplace to support pans and kettles while preparing food.

##### Tongs

The Tongs (_Mashi_) were used for the fire where the trivet is. Thus, the
people’s constellation Tongs is very close to the constellation Trivet.

##### Sofra

The typical semi-circular shape of the constellation Corona Borealis evoked the
image of a wooden round table called _Sofra_.

##### Auger

Auger (_Svrdel_). People say that this is a very big drill used for
construction of houses and is found inside the Priest’s Straw.

##### Thieves

The famous constellation Ursa Major among the people is described as a group of
thieves (_Aramii_). The seven bright stars of Ursa Major are said to be thieves
„because during the entire night they circle on the sky same as thieves that
circle around houses“


## References

 - [#1]: Cenev G, Sky over Macedonia, 2004
 - [#2]: Macedonian Research Society: [Website](http://mid.org.mk/ethnoastronomy/)
 - [#3]: Cenev, Gjore (1985). _The astronomical knowledge of the south-west Macedonia's people._ "Publications of the Astronomical Society of "Rudjer Bošković", No. 4, p. 139 - 146". Belgrade, Yugoslavia. [Link](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1985PASRB...4..139C)
 - [#4]: Cenev, Gjore (2004). _Sky Map of Macedonian People._ Skopje, Mladinski kulturen centar
 - [#5]: Cenev, Gjore (2004). _Neboto nad Makedonija (Sky over Macedonia)._ Skopje, Mladinski kulturen centar.
 - [#6]: Cenev, Gjore (2008). _Macedonian Folk Constellations._ Publications of the Astronomical Observatory of Belgrade, vol. 85, p. 97-109. Belgrade, Serbia. [Link](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2008POBeo..85...97C)
 - [#7]: Cenev, Gjore (2014). _The Ancient Sky Map Of The Macedonian People._ Cosmos – The Journal of the Traditional Cosmology Society, volume 30, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom. [Link](http://www.academia.edu/18707131/The_Ancient_Sky_Map_Of_The_Macedonian_People)

## Authors

This sky culture was contributed by _Vancho Stojkoski_ and _Gjore Cenev_ from
Macedonian Research Society based primarily on the book _Sky over Macedonia_
by Cenev G, 2004 [#1].

Technical re-work: Susanne M Hoffmann

## License

GNU GPL v2.0
